---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.12
    jupytext_version: 1.6.0
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Class 15: Intro to ML & Modeling
Questions we need to answer:

* What are modeling and machine learning and how do they work together?
* What is our goal when we use models for data?

+++

<!-- annotate: What is a Model? --> 
## What is a Model?
In machine learning (ML) what we mean by modeling, is roughly the same thing that statisticians mean by that.Accordingly, machine learning model is some types of equations that expresses our assumptions about the data that we will use to make predictions.  

+++

<!-- annotate: Types of Models in Machine Learning --> 
## Types of Models in Machine Learning
Observed "x" and "y" ==> Supervised learning
    Observed "x"   ==> Unsupervised learning
Observed more "x" than "y" ==> semi-Supervised learning
+++

<!-- annotate: Supervised Learning --> 
## Supervised Learning
There are two chategories for supervised learning:

**y-Discrete :** If features have discrete values of y for each x, then we have a Classification problem. 

e.g. Flower specious, will/not click an advertisment. 

**y-continuous :** If features have continuous values of y for each x then we have a Regression problem.

e.g. SAT scor, height of people 

*Some other examples of supervised learning: Airbnb recommendations, targeting advertisement,YouTube recommendations, search results, shopping recommendations*
+++

<!-- annotate: Classification --> 
## Classification
In most of machine learning modelings, first we split data for two purposes, training and testing.
We have to have seperate data for training and testing purposes, because, trained models have memorised the training data and we need to test them on unseen data.
each learning algorithm learns a specific model in general, and most of those algorithms are some form of optimization.
```{code-cell} ipython3

```
